# LK-SEC-2023-1

## Timeline
- 2022-12-01 [CVE-2022-1471][cve] is discovered in SnakeYAML
- 2022-03-27 A customer inquires Linkurious about the impact of [CVE-2022-1471][cve] in Linkurious Enterprise 
- 2022-04-06 Linkurious discloses this document

## Description
Vulnerability in a dependency of Elasticsearch.
[Elasticsearch did not disclose any vulnerability nor patch][disclosure].

## Impact
If an administrator of Linkurious Enterprise crafts a malicious YAML configuration file for the embedded Elastisearch instance,
they might be able to execute arbitrary code on the server.
This requires direct access to the filesystem of the server on which Linkurious Enterprise is installed, as well as file-edit
permissions on the Elasticsearch configuration files.

## Severity: low
- CVSS v3.1 score: `2.5` (see [score details][score]).
- No patch is necessary.

## Who is affected?
All versions of Linkurious Enterprise except Docker builds (which do not contain Elasticsearch at all).

## How can it be patched?
- There is not patch necessary, as the vulnerability requires high system privileges to be exploited
- Docker builds of Linkurious Enterprise can be used in case of compliance necessity, since they do not contain Elasticsearch and its dependencies
- The embedded Elasticsearch server can be disabled or non-Docker builds of Linkurious Enterprise:
  - In version prior to Linkurious Enterprise 4.0.4: by not configuring any data-source with the embedded Elasticsearcg and restarting Linkurious Enterprise
  - In Linkurious Enterprise 4.0.4 and later: by stopping Linkurious Enterprise and setting `disabled: true` on the `Embedded Elasticsearch` entry in `data/manager/manager.json`, then restarting Linkurious Enterprise.

[score]: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln-metrics/cvss/v3-calculator?vector=AV:L/AC:H/PR:H/UI:R/S:U/C:N/I:N/A:H/E:U/RL:O/RC:C/CR:H/IR:M/AR:M/MAV:L/MAC:H/MPR:H/MUI:R/MS:U/MC:N/MI:N/MA:H&version=3.1
[changelog-30]: https://doc.linkurio.us/admin-manual/3.0/release-notes/
[cve]: https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2022-1471
[disclosure]: https://discuss.elastic.co/t/snakeyaml-vulnerability-cve-2022-1471-on-latest-es-version/327854
